---
layout: post
title: "4x5 camera"
author: "Landon"
tags:
- engineering
gallery: true
---

A project log of building my highly-portable 4x5 camera, designed for wide-angle and astrophotography. All of the STL files are available on [Thingiverse](https://www.thingiverse.com/thing:5569646), and the CAD files will be linked in the relevant section.

TODO: IMAGE HERE

### Origin Stories

Quite a long time ago, my friend [Bayley](http://isopack.blogspot.com/) built a digital view camera out of the parts of a [Sinar X](http://isopack.blogspot.com/2016/05/view-camera-part-1.html). That project involved getting rid of the original 4x5 bellows and the frame portion of the standards, which he then gifted to me, as a fellow photography geek. Those have been sitting on my shelf for quite a while, just waiting for a project to turn them back into a camera.

The pieces came together when one day I happened to be browsing [Adorama's used listings](https://www.adorama.com/l/Used/Photography/Lenses/Specialty-Lenses) and noticed a very curious Sinaron 65mm f/4.5 in Sinar DB mount, for only $120. It was listed as "G" condition, which is generally unusably bad, but in my experience, Adorama sometimes drastically mis-lists some particularly unusual lenses (I once scored a mint condition Sigma 500/4.5 manual focus lens for $300). Curious to at least check it out, I ~made the pilgrimmage~ walked across the street from my office to Adorama and asked to check it out in person. Turns out, it was in perfect condition, and the guy even offered me $20 off, so I got it for a flat $100.

To add some more details about this lens, it's worth noting that this lens is actually a Rodenstock Grandagon by manufacture. Those were originally sold for like $2k new, and still go for $370-450 used. In terms of wide-angle lenses for 4x5, this is way up there, only 3 other lenses are wider: a 58mm, a 55mm, and incredibly a 47mm https://www.largeformatphotography.info/lenses/LF4x5in.html. Most normal people are happy with a 90mm lens on 4x5 (rule of thumb: divide by 3 to get the 35mm equivalent).

DOUBLE CHECK - MULTICOATED?

Unfortunately, this lens came in a Sinar DB mount. The good news is that it directly fits in my Sinar standards. The bad news is that there's no shutter mechanism, only an aperture, and even that would require some adapting to actually be usable. For testing, I borrowed the Copal 0 shutter from a 135mm lens I had. Turns out, to even mount the 65mm, I needed to pry out a decorative plastic ring to let the front element seat fully. For the final version, I purchased another Copal 0 online so I didn't have to swap in the field.

## Design + Printing

A plan started forming to design a simple focus mechanism that could mount to the half-standards I had, and by not allowing for any movements, I could save quite a bit of weight and complexity. Further, by designing only for wide-angle lenses, I could keep the focusing rails very short and make this (just barely) a camera I could slot into my bag alongside a normal DSLR for normal photos. Coupled with my Grafmatic sheet film holder, which can hold 6 sheets while being only barely thicker than a normal 2-sheet holder, I could easily have an entire weekend's worth of film without much extra space used.

I elected to use 3d printer motion parts for speed and cheapness, since I wanted to have the camera ready in time for a trip to Acadia national park. My basic design wound up basically copying the [Linhof wide angle focus thingamajig](https://www.keh.com/shop/large-format-linhof-wide-angle-focus-device-zwss-tan-718610.html).

There were 3 main parts here: each of the two standard adapters, and a recessed lens board, since recessed lens boards mean you don't need bulky bag bellows. I basically worked on them all in parallel in order to meet my deadline for going to Acadia.

TODO: more photos, finish this section. Show iteration, show increased length and second linear bearing increasing stiffness.

## First use & Lessons learned

When you think about it, this blob was basically perfect for use in astrophotography - very wide angle, sharp, and relatively wide aperture. Obviously it wouldn't beat any remotely modern digital system, but who wouldn't want a 4x5 transparency of star trails? Unfortunately, I forgot my focusing loupe on this trip, so focusing had to be done only approximately / by eye. We'll see once I get the film developed whether that worked at all...

In general, it would be really great to have a better way to focus this to infinity at night, by marking on the focusing rails (as well as marking out some depth of field indicators). I resorted to trying to focus on some lights that were far away, but it's not really possible to do that with enough accuracy to be perfectly in-focus. I also didn't want to stop down much, because I was taking photos of star trails on ISO 100 film, which meant I needed as much light as I could get.

Although the camera isn't that heavy, it is still a bit of an awkward shape for trying to fit into a bag - just a bit too wide to sit sideways, and having the pokey focusing rails pointing out also seems like a bad idea. I wound up traveling with the focusing rails removed, which helped some, but since the focusing screw is fixed in place, it didn't help much. In a future revision, maybe I'd consider a snap fit or magnetic attachment mechanism between the standards and the focusing components, so that it can be broken down flat. Either of those would probably be robust enough, since the camera doesn't really see any significant forces during use. Alternatively, I could add a hinge, but at that point I've just made a field camera, which is a morphology that already exists.

